---
layout: documentation
title: hostsfile
category: documentation
subcategory: 14.6.0/components
menu: 'components.md'
---
### NAME

NCM::hostsfile - NCM local hosts file configuration component

### SYNOPSIS

- Configure()

    Updates the `/etc/hosts` file with the
    entries specified within the configuration. The entries in the configuration
    are keyed by the primary hostname. If an entry describes a hostname which
    is already in `/etc/hosts` (either as a primary hostname, or as an alias), then
    that host entry will be left alone (if takeover is false), or will be
    completely replaced by the entry specified in the configuration (if takeover
    is true).

    A comment '\### NCM' is added to each line so that any deletions will also be
    cleaned up correctly.

    Returns error in case of a failure.

- Unconfigure()

    not available.

### RESOURCES

- _/system/network/domainname_

    When specifying hosts within the entries nlist, if a hostname is not FQDN
    and there if there are no aliases defined, then an alias will be automatically
    created using an FQDN formed by joining the shortname with
    this domain.

- _/software/components/hostsfile/file_

    The filename to modify, defaults to `/etc/hosts.`

- _/software/components/hostsfile/entries_

    An nlist, keyed by hostname. The value of each hostname is an nlist
    containing the following structure:

    - _ipaddr_

        The IP address of the host.

    - _aliases_

        A string value of aliases. Multiple aliases should be whitespace separated.

    - _comment_

        A comment to append to the line within `/etc/hosts.`

- _/software/components/hostsfile/takeover_

    A boolean. If false (the default), then pre-existing host lines in the file
    which are not tagged with the "NCM" comment will be preserved.
    If takeover is true,
    then pre-existing entries for hosts will be taken over and declared to be
    under NCM control.

### EXAMPLES

Example - configuration defined like this:

    include { 'software/components/hostsfile' };
    "/software/components/hostsfile/active" = true;
    "/software/components/hostsfile/file" = "/etc/hosts.local";
    "/software/components/hostsfile/entries" = nlist (
      "tsmstor601.cern.ch", nlist(
          "ipaddr", "192.168.1.101",
          "comment", "TSM DB disks"),
      "tsmstor602.cern.ch", nlist(
          "ipaddr", "192.168.1.102",
          "comment", "TSM Staging disks"),
      );

will modify the `/etc/hosts.local` file from

\### Do not remove the following line, or various programs
\### that require network functionality will fail.
127.0.0.1               localhost.localdomain localhost
137.138.45.75           lxfsec1604.cern.ch

to

\### Generated by Quattor component hostsfile
\### Do not remove the following line, or various programs
\### that require network functionality will fail.
127.0.0.1               localhost.localdomain localhost
137.138.45.75           lxfsec1604.cern.ch
192.168.1.101   tsmstor601.cern.ch tsmstor601 \### NCM TSM DB disks
192.168.1.101   tsmstor602.cern.ch tsmstor602 \### NCM TSM Staging disks

The syntax below is also possible

    "/software/components/hostsfile/entries/tsmstor603" = nlist(
        "ipaddr", "192.168.1.103",
        "comment", "TSM more disks"
    );

or

    "/software/components/hostsfile/entries/tsmstor603/ipaddr" = "192.168.1.103";
    "/software/components/hostsfile/entries/tsmstor603/comment" = "Testing";

### DEPENDENCIES

None.

### BUGS

None known.

Tim Bell &lt;&gt;

### SEE ALSO

hosts(8)
