---
layout: article
title: Pan Compiler v9.3 Released
category: news
---

After two release candidates, the final 9.3 version of the pan
language compiler has been released.  The major changes in this
release include better support for multiple output formats and
streamlined parameters from the command line, ant task, and maven
plugin.

The older command line interface is still available as `panc-old`.
Similarly, the old parameters for the ant task are still available, so
current build files will still work correctly.  However, the old
command line interface and ant parameters are _deprecated_ and will be
_removed in v9.4_.  Please update your configurations and tools.

In addition to the standard bug fixing and streamlining of the
compiler, the next release will concentrate on removing the need for
the escape and unescape functions.  All of the currently deprecated
features will be removed for v9.4.

Issues
------

Please report any issues or feature requests via the [GitHub issue
tracker](https://github.com/quattor/pan/issues).  Open request in the
SourceForge trackers will be migrated to GitHub shortly.

Download
--------

The source code is hosted in [GitHub](http://github.com/quattor/pan).
Please download the sources from there.

The packaged versions of the compiler are available from
[SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/quattor/files/panc/9.3/)
as usual, although this will be the last pan compiler release that is
pushed there.

These packages can also be downloaded from
[GitHub](https://github.com/quattor/pan/downloads).  This will be the
default location for future releases.


ChangeLog
---------

* (SF Bug #3585672) Permit both lower and upper case strings for
  warnings flag in ant and maven tasks.
* (SF Bug #3585346) Misleading deprecation message for debug element
* (SF Bug #3582159) Uncaught exception when creating XML transformation
* (SF RFE #3581805) Remove support for XMLDB format.
* (SF RFE #3581801) Change dependency file extension from *.xml.dep to
  *.dep.
* (SF RFE #3535682) Allow multiple output formats to be generated from
  CLI.
* (SF Bug #3535413) Check timestamps of all requested output file
  formats.
* (SF Bug #3529737) Non-object templates can be accessed via value().
* (SF Bug #3579769) Tests failed because of change in TreeSet contract
  in Java 1.7.
* (SF Bug #3579770) Shell scripts use bash syntax. Explicitly use bash
  in she-bang lines.
* (SF Bug #3581163) Invalid replacement string in replace() raises
  uncaught exception.
* (SF RFE #3489988) Allow negative values in range expressions.
* The include syntax without required braces is now allowed.
* The panc command no longer includes the possibility to process
 annotations.  This functionality is now in a separate command
 panc-annotations.
* The panc command now uses a streamlined set of options that are not
 compatible with the previous one. The previous one can be invoked
 with the panc-old command.



