---
layout: article
title: Starting a site with Aquilon
category: documentation
modified: 2013-11-16
author: Luis Fernando Muñoz Mejías
---

**THIS IS WORK IN PROGRESS**

## Introduction

After
[installing Aquilon](/documentation/2012/10/31/install-aquilon.html), we
want to add hosts to our instance, and produce some useful
configuration.

We'll explain in this document the steps to set up the clusters
for the Daily Planet, Superman's employer.

### Aquilon terminology

These are the basic terms in Aquilon operations:

* `archetype`: The highest possible grouping of hosts into distinctly
    seperate types, analogous to a QWG site. Archetypes are a bundle
    that expresses how to build something. It defines what set of
    templates to use (for example, what operating systems are
    available, etc).  Hosts therefore require an archetype to define
    how they are compiled.
* `broker`: The backend which the aq client communicates with and the
    owner of all object and production templates.  We'll refer to it
    also as `aqd`.
* `cluster`: A group of hosts related in some way, different to an
    archetype in that hosts may or may not be in a cluster. When
    grouping hosts into a cluster, an object profile is also built for
    the cluster, as well as the hosts. Clusters go through a
    completely different schema and build process to how hosts are
    built and therefore have a different archetypes.
* `domain`: A set of shared Quattor templates. Entities to be
  configured live in exactly one domain. A domain is currently
  implemented as a branch in the template-king git repository.
* `feature`: A re-useable configuration template that configures a
  specific thing but does not in itself describe a complete
  system. (So similar to a chef recipe.) A feature may be included in
  a personality or anywhere else that PAN template code can be
  included.
* `personality`: Analogous to QWG machine types, describes the
  services required but not the instance (selected using plenary
  template information).
* `plenary`: Template generated by the broker, on the fly, from an
  external source such as a database.
* `sandbox`: A development area for making changes to (Pan)
  templates. Each sandbox must be started from a domain and hosts or
  clusters may be managed into the sandbox to allow for pre-deployment
  testing. Once the template code is fully tested, it must be
  published back to the broker and then deployed to the shared domain.
* `service`: A network-based service with well-known clients and
  servers such as DNS, DHCP, NTP, etc. Each service can have multiple
  instances. Service instances must be mapped which allows the
  administrator to model client hosts connecting to different
  instances based on location and optionally personality.

### Before proceeding

Some understanding of Quattor's [architecture]() and the
[Pan language]() are expected before reading this document.

We'll interact with the broker using the `aq` command, which has lots
of sub-commands.  Each sub-command has a detailed help, and man pages
can be found in the appendix of the [Aquilon book](http://FIXME).

In this stage we will be adding a site, so we will use `add_*`
commands.  Most of the commands we'll use have `show_`, `update_` and
`del_` counterparts.  You are recommended to read the help of each
command before actually running it.

## Archetypes, domains...

You need to start by declaring archetypes and the basic domains for
your Aquilon instance.  Let's imagine we have two archetypes, one for
Linux hosts under Quattor control and another one for IPMI interfaces

```bash
aq add_archetype --archetype 'linux' --compilable
aq add_archetype --archetype 'ipmi' --nocompilable
```

Next come the domains, which are just Git branches with some metadata.
We'll define a `prod`uction and a `test`ing domains.

```bash
aq add_domain --domain 'prod'
aq add_domain --domain 'test'
```

## Storing your inventory

The Aquilon database contains the entire inventory of your
infrastructure.  You may use it as your asset management database, or
feed it from your existing one.  You will have to store all your
hardware, its characteristics and locations, which is easy to script
but nevertheless may be an annoying process.

### Geographical locations

Before starting, you have to add the geographical locations of your
infrastructure.  The meanings of the commands to run should be
obvious.  We list here an example:

```bash
aq add_organization --organization 'daily_planet'
aq add_hub --hub 'pacific' --organization 'daily_planet'
aq add_continent --continent 'america' --hub 'pacific'
aq add_country --country 'us' --continent 'america'
aq add_city --city 'metropolis' --fullname 'Metropolis' --country 'us' --timezone 'dct'
aq add_building --building 'hq' --city 'metropolis' --address '355, 1000 Broadway'
aq add_room --room 'supersecret' --building 'hq'
```

List your own addresses, rooms...  but remember that each step depends
on the previous ones.  If you want to add European countries, you have
to insert Europe as a continent first!

### Your hardware inventory

Next comes your hardware.  At the very least, your racks, chassis and
servers will be stored here.  It is a good place to store other
hardware such as switches.

For racks, you'll have to specify on which row and column inside that
row they are.

```bash
aq add_rack --rackid 'forlexluthor' --row 'R' --column 'C' --building 'hq'
```

Next come servers, switches, routers... we'll go for servers,
_machine_s in Aquilon terms.  Aquilon has to know the exact vendor and
model for each server, so here we go:

```bash
aq add_vendor --vendor 'luthorindustries' --comments "Bad guys make good sells"
aq add_model --model 'spyserver' --vendor 'luthorindustries' --type 'rackmount'
aq add_machine --machine 'illegaltapper' --model 'spyserver' --rack 'forlexluthor'
```

#### Network interfaces

Each machine has a number of network interfaces, with their MAC
addresses.  Don't forget to add them!

```bash
aq add_interface --interface eth0 --machine 'illegaltapper' --mac 'AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF'
```

## Declaring networks

Once we have the hardware in place, it's time to declare the networks
our hosts live in.

We'll use the `add_network` command:

```bash
aq add_network --network 'leaks' --ip '192.168.1.0' --netmask '255.255.255.0' --city 'metropolis'
aq add_network --network 'reporters' --ip '192.168.100.0' --netmask '255.255.255.0' --city 'metropolis'
```

### Wait, how do I define the routers for my networks?

When we declare our networks, Aquilon assumes the first IP address is
reserved for the router.  If this isn't correct, you have to modify
the configuration for the broker.  Create a `network_` section, and
declare the default gateway offset.  For instance, let's assume that
the gateway for `leaks` network above is on 192.168.1.30.  We edit `/etc/aqd.conf`:

```ini
[network_leaks]
default_gateway_offset=30
```

And finally we restart the broker:

```bash
service aqd restart
```

### DNS domains

Our network has some DNS domains.  We have to add them:

```bash
aq add_dns_domain --dns_domain 'dailyplanet.com'
```

### Personalities and features

Now that we have registered our host in the database, we want to use
it for something.  We want to give it a purpose, a `personality`.

Personalities are collections of smaller chunks called features.  A
`feature` is re-usable in many contexts, by different personalities,
hardware models or archetypes.

While we can bind features to personalities at any point in time, we
cannot change the personality of a host during its lifetime.  So we
create the desired personality and some features now:

```bash
aq add_personality --personality 'illegal-spying-and-tapping' --archetype 'linux'
aq add_feature --feature 'hushhush' --type host
aq add_feature --feature 'rootpasswd' --type host
```

And we bind them together the personality to the `hushhush` feature.
On the other hand, we want the root password to be set up for the
entire archetype, so:

```bash
aq bind_feature --feature 'hushhush' --personality 'illegal-syping-and-tapping' --archetype 'linux'
aq bind_feature --feature 'rootpasswd' --archetype 'linux'
```

## Declaring your first host

Now we can declare a host on our `illegaltapper` machine.

To do so, we have already:

* Stored all the relevant hardware in the database
* Declared all the network interfaces, with their MAC addresses
* Declared all the networks it will be connected to
* Declared all the DNS domains our host will live in
* Declared a personality for our host

Now, we use all that information to add a `tapping` host:

```bash
aq add_host --hostname 'tapping.dailyplanet.com' --machine 'illegaltapper' --ip '192.168.1.3' --personality 'illegal-syping-and-tapping'
```

Congratulations!  You have your first host!  Run `aq show_host --all`
to see it.

But we aren't done yet.  This host is empty!!  And Aquilon won't even
compile it.  Now it's time to produce Pan code to configure the host.

## Creating your first sandbox

We'll do all our work in sandboxes, and we'll dispose of them when
their purpose is ready.   So, let's create our first sandbox:

```bash
aq add_sandbox --sandbox site-init
```

We'll also associate one host to it:

```bash
aq manage --sandbox $USER/site-init --hostname 'tapping.dailyplanet.com'
```

And you can now cd to the `templatesdir` (in our case,
`/var/lib/templates/$USER/site-init`) and start producing code there.

## Importing your first templates

It's now time for some Pan code!  Let's start by setting up the
archetype.  We'll create a directory for the `linux` archetype, and
put two Pan templates there: `base` and `final`.



## Compiling the first host

## Deploying the first configuration

## Conclusion
