---
layout: article
title: Quattor 13.1.2 released
category: news
---

Release 13.1.2 of the Quattor client modules is out and available in GitHub and the Yum repositories.

This brings the 13.1 series mostly into line with the current master branches with the exception of aii, ncm-ncd and the components from configuration-modules-core.

__This will be the last release in the 13.1.x series.__ Sites are _highly_ recommended to migrate to 13.9 or later.

As usual, thanks to all contributors and users for the improvements and feedback.

- James

Full Changelog
--------------

* aii
    * 27cde7d Fix invalid Perl code in the DHCP plugin.
    * f93603d Add quattor-installer command symlink
    * 8f972f2 Wait until the network is ready during post-reboot
* CAF
    * b1f74e5 Test the lock-fork only if $$ is writeable
    * 63318a2 Restrict when to release locks going out of scope
    * 8d1b58f Test that the hook is enabled at load time.
    * 5f31c4c Run restorecon only on SELinux-enabled systems
    * ed65020 Test that the diff will be shown with NoAction
    * 942ed30 Show the diff even under noaction
    * 9f0a9ad Fix whitespace
* CCM
    * f22b0f6 Add quattor-fetch command symlink
    * 773e723 Fix whitespace
* cdp-listend
* configuration-modules-core
    * c838215 Really roll back ncm-network
    * c8dc3b2 Really roll back to the previous ncm-network
    * ff32909 Really roll back to the very old ncm-spma
    * 49543d8 Fix dependencies for the old ncm-spma
    * 79c05c4 Ship the old ncm-openldap
    * 3efe85c Ship the old ncm-openvpn
    * 0ce6cb1 Ship the old ncm-sudo
    * 8be2304 Ship the ancient ncm-spma
    * 50c8c6f Honor locked versions when sparing dependencies
    * be65156 Fix test in the privilege lines.
    * 31333b8 remove extra column from perl code to match schema change
    * d256f45 types have strict spelling
    * 640e5d3 fix typo
    * ae8d572 add test for new bridge parameters
    * 16b3291 replace some forgotten bu calls with gen_backup_filename
    * 24603fd split some long lines
    * f151c6f replace internal bu with gen_make_filename (allows access from within unittests)
    * ab86cf9 intgrocdue FAIL_SUFFIX constant (allow access from unittests)
    * c1749c5 fix missing SEEK_SET
    * 440a666 working meaningful basic test
    * 2dd5183 introduce FileEditor/FileWriter to make tests possible
    * 9ea9133 whitespace fixes
    * 1cbcada remove unused function
    * d4d7be0 pass very basic test
    * 473f960 add some more interface options
    * 1925b60 actually add the briding_opts to the config file
    * 995d0f2 generalise bonding_options and add support for bridging_options
    * 70842ce add some more bridging related parameters
    * 7a46292 Add Stijn to the POM file.
    * 3debecf get rid of hex_string, use longs now (verified to work in sssd)
    * eda3ef6 revert the change (overlooked this change when comparing local schema)
    * 93833ff add debug_level, fix services type
    * 87b288b remove extensible schema
    * 60156ae unlike for the exclude
    * 1d1ccc1 fix typo
    * 73bc6c9 new tests for new tt files
    * a460577 ciphersuite colon separated list
    * 3df41f9 fix acces_provider definitio and add list for simple
    * f17d837 rewrite tt files for sssd
    * 2d3e4a5 adapt schema
    * 8b9448d Do not filter TT files.
    * d83a7f3 Initialize the file handle for sssd.conf.
    * d2dbcc1 Make sssd_service a type of string.
    * f135f7d Rename LDAP defaults to default
    * 41933e8 Add missing fields to the schema.
    * 18abc59 Add support for local providers.
    * 850d1cc Fix bugs in the schema.
    * e9e01e1 Finish the hadnling of simple and ldap domains
    * cf49404 Support the PAM and NSS services in sssd.conf
    * a06fecb Add TT files for the PAM and NSS services.
    * c09e5b2 Add a TT file for the [sssd] section in sssd.conf
    * 491229d Fix bugs and test the configure_sssd method.
    * 5d7308f Configure SSSD from within ncm-authconfig.
    * e14add9 Add TT files for rendering the SSSD configuration.
    * 52fdbff Include the TT files in the packaging.
    * ffb1bb6 Remove dummy contributors and old dependencies.
    * 69ccc08 Simplify the schemas of different access providers
    * d98ddc8 Split the data structures for SSSD.
    * 107b35f Dump the rest of the sssd-ldap into a data type.
    * 479462f Dump most of the sssd-ldap manual into the schema.
    * ec67df4 Add tests for the enable_files method.
    * adcd607 Add tests for the enable_nslcd method.
    * 83aa1b4 Pass the SSSD parameters to authconfig.
    * 4169ef2 Initiate a data structure for SSSD authentication.
    * f7400a9 Add tests for the SSSD authconfig parameters.
    * 3cd83cb Add tests for the LDAP parameters in authconfig.
    * e99eb64 Test the Hesiod configuration.
    * ed3fefe Test the NIS authentication methods
    * f2813bd Test the SMB authentication methods.
    * 274d347 Document the KRB5 tests.
    * 5bbc4b5 Test for the KRB5-related authconfig parameters.
    * d4801cb Improve the tests for versionlocking.
    * 698de62 Add unit tests for prepare-lock-lists.
    * 0342882 Add unit tests for the locked_all_packages method.
    * a916b8b refactor move_slapdd code
    * 46a58bf introduce separate variable for networkmanager commands
    * df79763 fix remarks
    * bdcd1b8 add basic test case
    * af865a0 use proper backup suffixes (all timestamped)
    * ada437f align with current production
    * da0b74b replace double comment hash
    * a216559 current production code
    * 7d6022c Support noaction in ncm-metaconfig.
    * 422b718 Test the new sudoers options.
    * f2f6677 Added new options
    * f5c769e Refactor versionlock
    * 4359a93 Adjust the POM for ncm-openvpn.
    * e79f799 update options regexp
    * 04773e3 Don't versionlock packages whose version is a *.
    * b16187e Untabify versionlock method
    * 1cf0ce8 ncm-chkconfig add should become a synonym for reset
    * faf9e1e update optiosn regexp
    * 9c5b166 Fix: $self->ERROR ==> $self->error
    * 38e27ad Enhanced ncm-openvpn with support for multiple servers on the same host. Note that this introduced a backward-incompatible schema change.
    * ed2a8e1 Configure the length of the key.
    * 783b698 Enhance the validation.
    * 979ca1b Support defining per-repository proxies.
    * 88607dd have more control over NetworkManager
    * 5d3598b Merge branch 'master' of https://github.com/quattor/configuration-modules-core
    * 68b02e8 Merge branch 'master' of https://github.com/quattor/configuration-modules-core
* configuration-modules-grid
    * e8174c5 Remove <repositories> on pom.xml of grid component
    * f4ea30a Change nexus server from stratuslab-srv01
* LC
* ncm-cdispd
* ncm-ncd
    * bc2e1dd added option include to add directories to perl search path
    * 07df0c8 Add quattor-configure, quattor-unconfigure and quattor-list commands
    * d68fdac Improve the README file
* ncm-query
    * 2a82448 Merge PR #2 from jrha/master
    * 04d165b Autocomplete the quattor-query command, too
    * 0daadc5 Add quattor-query command symlink
    * 2b5606c Fix whitespace
    * 9cef8d5 Document what is autocompleted.
    * 3aff192 Package the bash_completion script
    * 5e4c357 Add basic autocompletion to ncm-query
* rpmt-py
* spma
